# egg-passage

Influenza vaccine components are primarily mass-produced by growing large amounts of virus in chicken eggs. During this process, the virus commonly develops mutations that enable it to better replicate in eggs. These egg-adapted mutations can alter viral antigenicity and, subsequently, have resulted in decreased vaccine effectiveness during several flu seasons. Preventing egg-adaption from impacting vaccine effectiveness necessitates a broad understanding of how virus strains mutate during egg-passaging, and how these mutations affect antigenicity. Here, we employ phylogenetic methods both to identify egg-adapted mutations and to infer the antigenic effects of these mutations. This approach allows us to consider nearly 600 egg-passaged strains across the wide diversity of H3N2 influenza viruses that have circulated in the past 16 years. We show that 55% of these strains acquired at least one egg-adapted mutation, and that egg-adaptations are most frequent in recent viruses. These substitutions have a significant effect on antigenicity, resulting in an average 2-fold change in titers. Epistatic interactions between mutations suggest that there are multiple distinct “pathways” by which H3N2 viruses adapt to replicating in eggs. Strikingly, the most prevalent egg-adapted mutations, HA1 G186V and L194P, occur throughout all H3N2 genetic backgrounds but never co-occur in the same strain. Importantly, these mutations have substantially different antigenic effects, indicating that a candidate H3N2 vaccine virus with genotype 186V could be chosen to reduce potential antigenic change resulting from egg-passaging.

## Software
Written to work with augur version 3.1.5 commit [946f77d](946f77d9a1be6421253bcefebaf706a7e931d75b) and fauna commit [c6196b1](c6196b17bc5ac69b759739b69a4314976a934acd)
